# Audio ECS

*Experimental Status: Audio ECS is an experimental feature of 0.15.x, and may
evolve and mature in potentially-breaking ways in each patch release. Please
refer to the changelog when updating to newer patch releases.*

Audio ECS is an extensible architecture for processing realtime audio built on
Unity’s [Root
Output](https://docs.unity3d.com/6000.6/Documentation/Manual/audio-scriptable-processors-root-outputs.html)
APIs. It provides critical infrastructure for complex audio, including a
realtime allocator and ECS-friendly messaging.

## Terminology

First, there’s a lot of terminology floating around that needs to be
established.

-   **Scriptable Audio** – Unity’s low-level API surface for extending its audio
    system
-   **DSP Graph** – An old mid-level API surface for extending audio that Myri
    used to be built upon, but is being replaced by Scriptable Audio and Audio
    ECS
-   **Audio ECS** – A Myri-provided layer of infrastructure and APIs built on
    top of Scriptable Audio, designed to handle complex audio needs
-   **Audio/Realtime/DSP/Mixing Thread** – All these terms refer to the same
    thing, which is a dedicated thread in Unity applications apart from the main
    thread, render thread, and worker threads, which is exclusively responsible
    for processing audio
-   **Main/Visual/Control Thread** – This refers to the main application logic
    driven by the main thread, but may also include jobs running on the worker
    thread which were scheduled by the main thread
-   **Sample** – A single floating-point value in the range [-1, 1] which
    describes the pressure of the audio signal for a brief moment in time
-   **Sample Rate** – The number of samples per second which describe the
    pressure wave of the audio signal throughout that 1 second period coming out
    of a single speaker source
-   **Output Channel** – A virtual speaker source that can be assigned a unique
    sequence of samples
-   **Audio Frame / Mix Cycle** – The processing update of a small time period
    of audio, typically measured in number of samples needed to fill that time
    period, which happens repeatedly and has very strict sample delivery timing
    requirements
    -   Note that Unity sometimes refers to a *frame* as the set of samples
        across all output channels for a specific moment in time. Myri does not
        use this terminology, often referring to the concept as a *sample per
        channel* or sometimes just *sample*.
-   **Visual Frame / Control Update / Main Thread Update** – A time region on
    the main thread which ends and starts at a point after
    `PresentationSystemGroup` but before rendering, spanning a full simulation
    and rendering update cycle
-   **Command Update** – A set of messages collected during a visual frame
    generated by the main thread which should be sent to the audio thread
-   **Feedback Update** – A set of messages collected during an audio frame
    generated by the audio thread which should be sent to the main thread
-   **Pipe** – A data structure for passing messages between threads
-   **Root Output** – A pair of unmanaged objects, one belonging to the main
    thread, and one belonging to the audio thread, which are allocated by Unity
    and receive callbacks from Unity for processing audio, and are what Audio
    ECS is built upon
-   **Audio ECS Runner** – A user-written unmanaged type implementing a
    [VPtr](../Core/VPtr.md) interface which the Audio ECS runtime calls into
    from the audio thread
-   **Audio ECS Bootstrap** – A managed type implementing an interface
    responsible for creating the Audio ECS Runner as well as specifying memory
    requirements
-   **Realtime Allocator** – A special type of memory allocator intended for use
    in realtime-critical scenarios (such as the audio thread)

## Audio Is Realtime

Audio programming is unique, because it has hard realtime constraints. I won’t
get into the full details, but from Unity to the OS to the sound card, there is
a contract to deliver an array of samples repeatedly at a precise interval. If
the application fails to deliver one of these arrays in time, then the sound
card will produce artifacts, which can be extremely irritating to players (far
more so than a visual hiccup). For this reason, the audio thread is typically
executed with high priority, and simply cannot afford to miss delivering this
array of samples in time.

The time interval at which the arrays need to be delivered is directly related
to the sample rate and the array sizes. Modern operating systems and sound cards
support multiple combinations of these values. But for typical users, the sample
rate will be either 44.1 kHz or 48 kHz. The higher the sample rate, the smaller
the time interval. The other factor is the array size (often referred to as
buffer size). Usually this is measured in the number of samples for a single
channel. The higher the number, the longer the time interval, but also the more
samples that need to be calculated in that interval.

For an extremely low-latency application such as a virtual guitar amp, the array
size might be as low as 8 samples. Divide the samples by the sample rate of 48
kHz, and you get a time interval of 166 microseconds. That’s extremely small,
and a lot can go wrong, which is why outside of dedicated applications, the
array is typically larger.

64 samples is a typical size for low-latency audio applications. Otherwise,
common values are between 256 and 4096 samples per channel. 1024 samples at 48
kHz (a common default on Windows) as an interval of \~20 milliseconds, which is
fairly forgiving. Some mobile devices require 256 samples per channel which only
has an interval of \~5 milliseconds. Remember, this is a hard limit that must be
satisfied every time, not some average. That means you have to be concerned with
worst-case performance. There are special rules and guidelines you should follow
for that.

### Avoid Managed Code

The garbage collector can throw a surprise several millisecond stall on your
application. By default, the audio thread is immune to this stall, but that
changes the moment managed code runs on it. As soon as that happens, the audio
thread is susceptible to GC pauses for as long as the application (or Unity
Editor) is running.

Fortunately, Burst-compiled code does not count as managed code, so as long as
all code on the audio thread is Burst-compiled from the start, then GC pauses
won’t affect the audio thread. This is why some Unity samples use
`[BurstCompile(CompileSynchronously = true)]`. However, this only affects the
editor.

In the editor, designers should generally wait for Burst eager compilation to
finish before entering play mode. And developers can often get away with Burst
being disabled as long as the array size is 1024 or larger, they are running a
simpler debug scene, and they have their computer audio turned down a bit.

### Avoid Logging

Logging can easily eat a couple of milliseconds sometimes. If you are debugging
audio code, it can sometimes be fine, especially for higher array sizes. But you
must absolutely make sure you remove all logging for builds.

### Avoid Completing Jobs Early

Yes. You are actually allowed to schedule and complete jobs from the audio
thread, as if it were the main thread. But you should generally avoid doing so.

Think about it, if you are thinking of scheduling a parallel job, you are
basically saying you have too much work for a single thread to handle, and are
hoping that a worker thread is free at the moment to help out. Hoping is not a
good strategy for realtime audio.

However, jobs are really useful for doing non-urgent tasks off the audio thread.
So it is fine to check `JobHandle.IsCompleted` once per audio frame and only
call `JobHandle.Complete()` once it is `true`. But don’t do this if your target
platform doesn’t have at least one worker thread available.

### Avoid File IO and Other OS Operations

Don’t interact with files, or try and do things with the operating system. As
any one of these operations can unexpectedly stall. Do these types of things in
jobs, scheduled either from the main thread or the audio thread.

### Avoid Locking

Avoid any and all usages of mutexes or other types of locks. These can cause the
audio thread to get stuck waiting too long. Stick to atomic operations or rely
on the Audio ECS messaging system.

### Avoid Exceptions

Audio code should be running with Burst on the target device, so if it throws an
exception, your application will crash.

### Avoid Using Engine APIs

Avoid calling any Unity Engine APIs you wouldn’t call in a job. The only
exception is the job scheduling and `JobHandle` APIs as discussed above. Also,
even if you know an API is job-safe, still be careful. If the API relies on any
internal engine state in any way, then it may be a locking API.

### Use the Realtime Allocator

Unity’s documentation advises avoiding allocations on the audio thread. That
includes `Allocator.Temp`. Instead, it suggests that all memory resources be
stack-allocated or passed in from the main thread and pooled.

The issue with this advice is that most of the Collections package collections
can allocate dynamically. So simply creating them on the main thread is not
enough to ensure this rule is followed. Some types victim to this are
`NativeList`, `NativeHashSet`, and `NativeQueue`, as well as their Unsafe
counterparts.

Audio ECS provides a better solution for this in the form of a realtime
allocator. This is an allocator that reserves a fixed block of memory
exclusively for the audio thread that it can then allocate from. Additionally,
it will schedule a background job to reserve another fixed block whenever it has
less than half a block remaining at the start of an audio frame.

The realtime allocator can still get overwhelmed if too much memory is requested
in a short amount of time. At that point, it will be at the mercy of Unity and
the operating system to give it a memory block on-demand in a timely manner.
Also, this block acquisition strategy only works if the application has worker
threads. Fortunately, the block size can be configured at Audio ECS startup, and
can be tuned to avoid problems in practice.

Note that the realtime allocator requires collections be manually disposed of,
as if they were allocated with `Allocator.Persistent`.

### Prefer Unsafe\* over Native\* Collections

Except for when scheduling the odd background job, the Native\* collections
don’t provide much value over the Unsafe\* collections as long as you are
passing those collections around by `ref` and `in`. The Native\* collections are
harsher on the realtime allocator, so try to avoid them for simple things.

## Defining an Audio ECS Runner

**Warning:** Currently, Myri’s features haven’t migrated to Audio ECS yet. But
you can still create your own Audio ECS runtime manually.

To create an Audio ECS instance, you need to define a runner. The runner is an
unmanaged struct that receives callbacks from Audio ECS on the audio thread. The
runner is what is actually responsible for generating audio samples.

The runner should be declared as `partial`, and must implement both the
`IAudioEcsSystemRunner` and `IVInterface` interfaces. Only the methods of
`IAudioEcsSystemRunner` require user-provided implementations. There are four of
them:

-   OnInitialize() – Called once before any other callback
-   OnAudioFormatChanged() – Called whenever some configuration of the audio
    changed, such as switching to headphones or changing the OS sample rate
-   OnUpdate() – Called once per audio frame
-   OnShutdown() – Called once right before Audio ECS is shut down

Each of these callbacks provide a `context` which contains several useful
fields, discussed individually.

### auxWorld

The `auxWorld` is an Aux ECS type which provides a storage data structure for
ECS-style logic within the audio thread. The `auxWorld` will initially be empty,
and the runner does not have to use it. But future Myri tools will take
advantage of it.

`auxWorld.allocator` is the realtime allocator. Please use it.

### unityAudioRealtimeContext

This `RealtimeContext` comes straight from the root output callback, and
provides the `dspTime` property as well as the `Process()` method which can
evaluate a `GeneratorInstance`. Use of any of this is not required. It is simply
provided as a resource.

### pipeWriter

The `pipeWriter` is an API for sending messages to the main thread. There are
three ways to send a message: `WriteMessage<T>()`, `CreateMessage<T>()`, and
`CreateMessageDynamic()`. A message can be any unmanaged type. `pipeWriter` also
provides a `CreatePipeSpan<T>()` method. This method provides an array allocated
within the pipe. It can be assigned as a field to any message written to the
pipe. And it can even be nested inside other `PipeSpan` instances.

A new `pipeWriter` is created for each audio frame. Do not hold onto or assign a
`PipeSpan` from a previous audio frame. Unlike Unity Scriptable Audio `Pipe`
objects, Audio ECS pipes are designed to transfer larger amounts of data and
more complex data structures.

### feedbackId

When all the messages from a specific audio frame arrive on the main thread,
they are associated with a `feedbackId`. This ID uniquely names an audio frame,
and could be interpreted as an audio frame counter (it counts up from 0).

This is the `feedbackId` for the audio frame currently being processed, and the
ID any messages that are being written to the current `pipeWriter` will be
associated with.

### newAudioFormat

`newAudioFormat` is provided in the `OnInitialize()` and
`OnAudioFormatChanged()` callbacks, and provides the audio format that should be
used. The `AudioFormat` is a Unity type which provides several useful
properties:

-   `channelCount` – The number of output channels [1, 8]
    -   Hint: Stereo audio has 2 channels, left and right
-   `bufferFrameCount` – The number of samples in a single channel that need to
    be processed during a single audio frame
-   `sampleRate` – The number of samples in a single channel that are fed to the
    audio device per second
-   `speakerMode` – An `enum` representing the configuration of speakers

### allRootOutputsEarlyProcessingJobHandle

This is a `JobHandle` that combines the `JobHandle` of the `EarlyProcessing()`
stage of all root outputs. The root output of Audio ECS always produces a
default `JobHandle` for this stage. At the time of writing, you can ignore this,
as there doesn’t seem to be any third-party assets that leverage this yet.

### visualFrameUpdates

This contains the collection of control updates from all the visual frames that
finished since the start of the last audio frame. `visualFrameUpdates` can be
indexed, or iterated via `foreach`. Each control update contains a `commandId`,
which is similar to the `feedbackId`, but for visual frames. The update also
contains a `pipeReader`, which allows reading messages from the pipe.

The order of messages in the `pipeReader` is nondeterministic relative to the
order they were written. If determinism is required, the messages should contain
sorting IDs. However, iterating the `pipeReader` multiple times consecutively
will result in the same message order.

Messages in the `pipeReader` are grouped by type. To iterate a type, call
`Each<T>()` in a `foreach` expression. A type-erased overload also exists.

The `pipeReader` instances and their contents are only valid for a single audio
frame.

### finalOutputBuffer

`finalOutputBuffer` is where to write evaluated samples to be sent to the sound
device. Call `GetChannel()` to get a `Span<float>` for the samples corresponding
to a specific channel. These samples will be uninitialized, and you must
overwrite them.

If you do not call `GetChannel()` for a specific channel index, then 0s will be
written to that channel automatically.

## Creating an Audio ECS Runtime

To create an Audio ECS runtime, you will need to define a managed type which
implements the `IAudioEcsBootstrap` interface. This interface requires two
methods to be implemented.

`ShouldWaitForMyriSourceOrListenerBeforeStarting()` is currently never called,
and you can return whatever you want. It will serve a purpose once Myri’s
built-in sources and listeners have migrated to Audio ECS.

`OnStart()` is the important method. It is passed in a `Configurator`, which you
must call `Configure()` on within the `OnStart()` method. `OnStart()` is where
you construct your `IAudioEcsSystemRunner`.

`Configure()` is where you pass in your `IAudioEcsSystemRunner` instance. Avoid
storing dynamic memory allocations within the instance at this time, as it will
be difficult to release such allocations correctly. Also note that the instance
you passed in will be copied to the audio thread, so don’t rely on its memory
address at the time of creation as a way to communicate with it.

### Configuring the Realtime Allocator

The `Configure()` method is also where you specify the block size of the
realtime allocator. The minimum block size is 128 kB, although more is generally
recommended.

A rule of thumb is that the block size should be 2.5x larger than the maximum
amount of memory you might allocate over a period of 50 milliseconds.
Additionally, if there are no worker threads, then the block size should be 1.5x
larger that the maximum amount of memory that will ever be required for the full
lifecycle of the Audio ECS runtime.

### Creating the Audio ECS Runtime Manually

To manually create an Audio ECS instance which does not interact with Myri’s
audio sources and listeners, call `MyriBootstrap.CreateCustomAudioEcsRuntime()`.
This method will return a `RootOutputInstance`, which you will need to dispose
yourself when you want to shut down the Audio ECS runtime by calling `Destroy()`
on the same `ControlContext` you passed in.

Note that when creating an Audio ECS runtime manually, blob assets from
subscenes cannot be safely passed through the pipes.

## Interacting with the Audio ECS Runtime from the Main Thread

Audio ECS is interactable from the main thread via two collection components and
a Unity ECS component, all attached to the `worldBlackboardEntity`.

### AudioEcsCommandPipe

`AudioEcsCommandPipe` is a collection component that allows sending messages to
the audio thread. The `pipe` property provides a similar API surface to the
`pipeWriter` inside an Audio ECS context. And similarly, the `commandId`
property specifies the `commandId` that will be associated with any messages
sent, and corresponds to the current visual frame.

Always request `AudioEcsCommandPipe` with `readOnly` access, and use the
`[ReadOnly]` attribute on it in jobs. This collection is safe to write to from
multiple jobs simultaneously, and thus uses flipped read-only/read-write
dependency tracking.

### AudioEcsFeedbackPipe

`AudioEcsFeedbackPipe` is a collection component that contains all messages sent
by all audio frames that finished since the start of the current visual frame.

It can be iterated by each audio frame, with each frame providing an API
matching `pipeReader` from `visualFrameUpdates`. Because Audio ECS operates a
single audio thread, messages of a specific type are ordered in the order they
were written to the pipe.

Always request `AudioEcsFeedbackPipe` with `readOnly` access, and use the
`[ReadOnly]` attribute in jobs.

### AudioEcsAtomicFeedbackIds

This is an `IComponentData` that should only ever be accessed as read-only. This
component exists to help reduce scheduling latency concerns.

Let’s suppose a job scheduled from the main thread in a system wants to know if
a message it sent has been received by the audio thread yet. The audio thread
receives all messages at the start of the audio frame. However, when it responds
by writing a message, that message is not sent until the end of the audio frame.
Then it must wait for the next visual frame to start. And finally, the message
may be read later on in the visual frame after other work has been done. All
that time adds up, and that can be problematic for any algorithm that is trying
to feed data from the main thread ahead of the audio thread clock.

Audio ECS atomically writes to a variable on every start of the audio frame
right after reading in and populating `visualFrameUpdates`. This variable
contains the new `feedbackId`, and the most recent `commandId` that the audio
thread read in. `AudioEcsAtomicFeedbackIds` provides an API to atomically read
this variable and obtain these values, bypassing much of the latency discussed
above.
