# Math

The Math directory in Latios.Core contains several publicly accessible
mathematic utilities:

## Latios Math

`LatiosMath` contains random useful functions I purposely refactored because of
frequent usage. It is best to look directly at the code to see what they do.

## simdFloat3

Often when working in 3D projects, `float3` instances and Unity’s `math` class
operations are very useful. However, they don’t make full use of 4-lane simd
hardware. In addition, using these types automatically disables Burst’s
autovectorization of loops.

`simdFloat3` packs four `float3` instances together into simd registers so that
operations can make use of full simd hardware throughput. You can perform
operator arithmetic on these types just like normal `float3`s, and you can
access some of the useful `math` functions using the `simd` static class
instead. To access any individual `float3`, you can use the letter properties
`a`, `b`, `c`, and `d` to get or set them. There is also swizzling support for
shuffling the order of these `float3` instances. Accessing a component of all
`float3`s can be performed using the `x`, `y`, and `z` properties as usual,
although these use `float4` values as there are four of them.

Operations between `simdFloat3`s and vector types can be confusing. If a
`simdFloat3 p` were to be multiplied by a `float3 v`, the result will be the
equivalent of multiplying each `float3` in `p` by `v`. However, if `p` were
instead multiplied by `float4 s`, the result will be equivalent to performing
`p.a * s.x, p.b * s.y, p.c * s.z, and p.d * s.w`.

## QCP

QCP is an algorithm similar to the Kabsch algorithm for computing the rigid
transform that produces the minimum RMSD of one set of points relative to
another set of target points in a pair-wise manner. The implementation provided
in the Latios Framework is highly-optimized, especially with Burst.
