# Sub-Systems

A `SubSystem` is a subclass of `SystemBase` which exposes additional API and
boilerplate reduction mechanisms within the framework. You can use them exactly
as you would a `SystemBase`, and frequently you will want to do just that.
However, there are some additional features to take advantage of.

Nearly all `SubSystem` features are [extended](ISystem%20Support.md) to
`ISystem`. `ISystem` is the preferred system type for performance.

## Fluent Queries

[Fluent query](Fluent%20Queries.md) expressions can be initiated using the
member property `Fluent`. You will likely want to use this inside of
`OnCreate().`

## Blackboard Entities

The two [blackboard entities](Blackboard%20Entities.md) can be accessed through
the member properties `sceneBlackboardEntity` and `worldBlackboardEntity`.
However, you must assign them to local `Entity` variables before using them in a
Bursted lambda job.

## Collection Component Dependency Management

When fetching a [collection
component](Collection%20and%20Managed%20Struct%20Components.md), rather than
complete the `JobHandle`s associated with that component, the `JobHandle`s will
be combined with `Dependency`. Additionally, by default `Dependency` will
automatically be used to update the `JobHandle`s of the collection component
after the `SubSystem` finishes `OnUpdate()`. When combined with lambda jobs, you
may never have to explicitly touch `Dependency` nor any other `JobHandle`.

## LatiosWorld Sync Point Dependency Management

The [LatiosWorld](LatiosWorld%20in%20Detail.md) instance can be accessed through
the `latiosWorld` member property without casting. From there, the `latiosWorld`
provides access to the
[SyncPointPlaybackSystem](Custom%20Command%20Buffers%20and%20SyncPointPlaybackSystem.md)
via the `syncPoint` property. Once you do this, `Dependency` will automatically
be sent to `SyncPointPlaybackSystem` after the `SubSystem` finishes
`OnUpdate()`. When combined with lambda jobs, you may never have to explicitly
touch `Dependency` nor any other `JobHandle`.

## New Scene Callback

When using the scene management system, a `SubSystem` can receive a callback
when a new scene is created by overriding `OnNewScene()`. The order these
functions are called do not reflect the system order. This callback happens
after the subscenes have been loaded and the blackboard entities have been
merged.

## Custom Update Criteria

`ShouldUpdateSystem()` can be overridden if a [custom
criteria](Super%20Systems.md) should dictate whether the `SubSystem` should
execute `OnUpdate()`. This does not disable Unityâ€™s `EntityQuery` checks. To
disable those, add `[AlwaysUpdateSystem]` to the `SubSystem`.

*Caution: Dependency and version numbers have not been updated yet when this
method is invoked. Only EntityManager, EntityQuery, and BlackboardEntity
operations are recommended.*

*Caution 2: SubSystems as baking systems are not currently supported.*
